meeting all right catherine i'm gonna
have to interrupt you there uh matt
hancock the health secretary coming out
at downing street to give us the
briefing good afternoon and welcome to
downing street for today's coronavirus
briefing and i'm joined by deputy chief
medical officer jenny harris
and dr susan hopkins the chief medical
advisor to public health england
and nhs test and trace we all know that
2020 has been a hard year and
it's ending in this festive period which
is going
to be very different after all the
efforts that we've gone through
to control this virus
and in many parts of the country
this virus is under control
just as we've got a tiered system in
place that was able to control
this virus we've discovered a new
more contagious virus a variant
that is spreading at a dangerous rate
and i know
that the vast majority of people
watching today and across the country
understand
what we need to do together to get
through this
and so today we're announcing further
action
within the tiering system and also some
further progress
on vaccines and on testing
and i just wanted to say this before i
set out the details of what we're going
to
have to put in place i know that these
actions have
consequences i know how difficult it is
but i also know that it is right to take
the action that's necessary to control
this virus
across the country cases have risen 57
percent in the last week
the average coveted hospital admissions
are 1909 a day
that's the highest figure since mid
april
there are 18 943 people
in hospital with coronavirus right now
that's almost as many as there were at
the peak
and yesterday there were 691 deaths
reported
that's 691 people
who have died just before christmas and
our hearts go out
to their families their loved ones as
with all who've
died from this horrible disease i know
the pain that this causes
so against this backdrop of rising
infections
rising hospitalizations and rising
numbers of people dying from coronavirus
it is absolutely vital that we act
we simply cannot have the kind of
christmas that we all yearn for
of course it's the social contact that
makes christmas
so special but it's that social contact
that the virus thrives on
and that's how the virus is spread from
one person to another
so it's important that we all minimize
our social contact
as much as is possible this christmas
and that will help protect ourselves
our loved ones and the whole country
we've got to keep our resolve we've got
to keep going through this
and there's four areas that i want to
update you on today
very specifically the first are those
tiering decisions that i just mentioned
we know that the three-tiered system
worked to control the old variant
and is working now in large parts of the
country especially
in northern england but we also know
that tier three
is not enough to control the new variant
this is not a hypothesis it is a fact
and we've seen it on the ground we've
seen case rates rise
in some of the places close to where the
current tier 4 restrictions are
in places like east anglia where we've
seen a
significant number of the new variant
and we've seen case races
rates rise sharply it is therefore
necessary
to put more of the east and southeast of
england into tier
iv we're also taking action in parts of
the south west
where there are some early signs of the
new variant
and where cases are rising
even though case rates in some of these
areas
are not as high as they are in in in the
areas badly affected in london for
instance and in kent
the direction is clear and in many cases
quite stark
the doubling times are short and
we've learned we have learned that when
it comes to being a matter of
when not if we take action it is better
to act
sooner so from one minute past midnight
on boxing day
sussex oxfordshire suffolk norfolk
and cambridgeshire those parts of essex
not yet in tier four
waverly in surrey and hampshire
including portsmouth and southampton but
with the exception of the new forest
will all be escalated to tier
iv bristol gloucestershire
somerset including the north somerset
council area
swindon the isle of wight the new forest
and northamptonshire
as well as cheshire and warrington will
all be escalated to tier three
and i'm afraid that cornwall and
herefordshire
have seen sharply rising rates and need
to be escalated to tier two
this is not news that anybody wants to
deliver and i am truly sorry for the
disruption that it
causes but i think people know how
important it is
that we take decisions like this to keep
people safe
and to protect the nhs
the second piece of news i want to tell
you about
is some developments about another new
strain of this virus
of course the fight against the virus is
a global effort and we're constantly
vigilant and looking around the world
and as part of our surveillance and
thanks to the
impressive genomic capability of the
south africans we've detected two cases
of another new variant of coronavirus
here in the uk
both are cases both are contacts of
cases who have traveled from south
africa over the past few weeks
the chief scientific advisor and the
chief medical officer and others met
their south african counterparts
over the last day and we are incredibly
grateful to the south african government
for the rigor of their science
and the openness and the transparency
with which they have
rightly acted as we did when we
discovered a new variant here
this new variant is highly concerning
because it is yet more transmissible
and it appears to have mutated further
than the new variant that's been
discovered in the uk
we've taken the following action first
we are quarantining cases
and close contacts of cases found here
in the uk second we're placing immediate
restrictions
on travel from south africa and finally
and most importantly
anyone in the uk who has been in south
africa
in the past fortnight and anyone who is
a close contact
of someone who's been in south africa in
the last
fortnight must quarantine
immediately by quarantine
i mean they must restrict all contact
with any
other person whatsoever we'll be
changing the law to give this
legal effect imminently now these
measures are temporary
while we investigate further this new
strain which is
shortly to be analyzed at portland down
and i want to thank everyone involved
for the seriousness
with which i know that they will take
these new instructions
i'd like now to move on to some more
positive developments
third the third thing i wanted to talk
about is an update on testing
as you know we continue rapidly to
expand the testing capability
uh here in the uk we're expanding
community testing yet further
in areas where the rate of infection is
highest
so we can identify people and especially
identify the around one in three people
who carry the virus without displaying
any symptoms at all
116 local areas have now signed up for
this community testing
and we're in discussion with more and
these rapid turnaround tests
are proving to be extremely effective at
finding
cases where we otherwise wouldn't and
i'm today publishing an assessment of
the liverpool community testing project
which shows how effective this can be
i'd urge
anyone who has the opportunity to take
part to protect their local area
and at the same time we're boosting
rapid testing in care homes
with a further 149 million pounds
to support that effort so all those who
work in care homes in england will
receive
two rapid tests a week in addition to
their weekly pcr tests
finally amid all of this difficulty
the great hope for 2021 is of course the
vaccine
the vaccine is our route out of all this
and however tough this christmas and
this winter is going to be
we know that the transforming force of
science
is helping to find a way through i'm
delighted to be able to tell you that
the oxford astrazeneca vaccine
developed here in the uk has submitted
its full data package to the
mhra for approval this is the next step
towards a decision on the deployment of
the vaccine
which is already being manufactured
including here in the uk
we are of course continuing to deploy
the fisa beyond tech
vaccine which is being delivered now
from over 500 sites all across the uk
and we're adding more all the time and
accelerating the rollout
i'm also delighted to be able to
announce that we have begun
vaccination in care homes we know that
people who live in care homes are
amongst the most vulnerable to this
disease
and i'm delighted that we're able to do
this
again it's another enormous logistical
challenge and i'm
very very grateful to colleagues in the
nhs
and in the social care sector who've
worked together so hard to make this
happen
this afternoon it gives me great joy to
tell you that the chelsea pensioners
will be vaccinated along with care home
residents
right across the country i think we all
need a bit of good news
and the reality is this vaccine program
is
the way we're going to get through this
because every time somebody's vaccinated
our country becomes a little bit safer
they become a little bit safer
and we get a little bit closer to the
life that we all want to get back to
i sincerely hope that this is my last
press conference before christmas
and i want to just take a moment firstly
to thank you
and everybody watching for all that you
have done and the sacrifices that you've
made
and i also want to thank my whole team
who've done
so much including including those here
uh susan and jenny but including the
huge team
in the nhs in the department and right
across the board
and as a country we've been faced with
these enormous challenges
and it's been very tough but i
especially want to thank those who
helped this country
to become the first in the world to roll
out a clinically approved vaccine
i want to thank all those who've helped
us build a
bigger capacity in genomic testing than
anywhere else in the world
and of course the biggest overall
testing capacity
in europe i want to thank our scientists
who've discovered the first proven
treatment for coronavirus
and i want to thank everybody working in
the nhs
and in social care for the work
that they've done this year and also for
the work that's going to carry on
this winter and especially to colleagues
who are working over christmas
which of course is so important in the
nhs and in social care
look i know how hard 2020 has been for
everybody
and after delivering some really
difficult news
if i if i may i want to end on a
reflection of where we are as a country
this christmas and the start of 2021 is
going
to be tough the new variant makes
everything
much harder because it spreads so much
faster
but we mustn't give up now we know
that we can control this virus we know
we can get through this together
we're going to get through it by
suppressing the virus until a vaccine
can make us safe
that's been our strategy and that's what
we must do
we're not going to give up now
especially after so much sacrifice
and i know that some of these decisions
are tough but i believe
in that everybody making the right
decisions
and i believe that everybody will do
what is needed
to keep themselves and others safe
especially this christmas
and i know from the bottom of my heart
that there are brighter skies ahead
and i'm now going to hand over to jenny
to give us an update on the data
especially on this the impact of this
new variant jenny
thank you secretary of state um first
slide please
so i'm just going to talk through about
half a dozen slides which highlight
in a graphical array the comments which
secretary of state has just outlined um
and as usual the darker colors
on the maps indicate higher rates or
higher rates of change
on this slide we can see on the left
hand side that
in the last seven days this is the last
full day case rates
full week sorry case rates up to the
17th of december
they've continued to rise at a very
rapid pace this is particularly in
london
the south east the east of england and
in wales and you can see that with the
dark colours there which equate to
more than 400 cases per 100 000 resident
population
one of the most important things is not
just how many cases there are but the
rate of change
and if we look to the right hand side
you can see that the darker pink and the
purple
is where those changes are really
starting to
move more rapidly so as expected it
perhaps doesn't show up quite as well on
the slide here but as expected again
particularly in london the south east
east of england and wales
but you can also see that the colour is
starting to change
through the bordering areas particularly
into
suffolk cambridge here and norfolk and
then treading down to the south
west next slide please
what we can see here is uh three lines
which are representing those areas
which are currently tier four areas so
places like london
and that's the dark black line and you
can see that since september
there has been a a rise and then
in november when the restrictions came
in and we had if you like the
original covid you can see that start to
decline
but then fairly soon afterwards and
particularly the start of this month
you can see an extraordinary rapid rise
in cases moving upwards
um the next the dotted line the purple
dotted line are those areas which are
now
moving into tier four and you can see
the
same shape of curve here what we what
we're trying to do
is identify where that rapid increase is
coming which is most likely due to the
new variant
and you can see that it's a parallel
line to
the areas where we currently know have
very high proportions
of new variant in the cases detected
what's equally important i think is to
look at the green dotted line
and these are areas in the rest of
england obviously a month
previously we've tended to see very dark
colours at the north
north west northeast and what you can
see there is the rise
during september october the november
restrictions coming in and quite a
significant drop
in that dotted green line so against our
old version of covid if you like the
restrictions had effect and what we're
dealing with now
is almost two different patterns one for
the new variant
and one for the old next slide please
and uh here uh this is uh
clearer i think in this one so these are
cases
uh identify the proportion of cases uh
which are positive
for covid19 uh from november and then
running in through to the middle of
december
the dark purple line is cases which are
new variant compatible
and the green line are the cases so in
some ways this is reflecting the green
and purple lines
on the original map and what you can see
again is that the original version of
covid
is been brought down from november you
can see quite a sharp decline in cases
and the leveling off but a very rapid
rise
in the new variant cases which are
moving forward at pace next slide please
and again if we just look at the three
most affected areas you can see this
very starkly
the green line again is other cases you
can see that they've dipped from
november
the national restrictions at that time
brought them down
there is some rise now but the real
sharp increase which is what we're
dealing with
is the new variant compatible cases and
obviously these are the most affected
areas
in other parts of england we're starting
now to see a mixed picture
where the other cases the original covid
cases have come down
have flattened but we're starting to see
rises and what we're looking out for is
that very sharp incline
in the rate of change next slide please
and of course unfortunately this then
translates through
to occupied beds with patients who are
covered positive
and you can see here that the number of
patients in hospital
came right down over the summer period
it
was rising steadily the november again
the november restrictions have dropped
that
but now it's starting to rise very
sharply almost certainly
with predominantly new variant cases and
so we're now very close to the spring
peak
in terms of the numbers of patients in
hospital
next slide please and again
this is just looking in london and
looking at covered positive
occupied beds again heading very much
towards the spring peak you can see the
flattening off
in the middle of november but now
steadily increasing
upwards and causing a lot of pressure
mostly obviously we're trying to treat
covered patients but
every time a bed is occupied by a
covered patient of course
we need to think through of the impact
in others seeking
hospital treatment thank you
thank you very much um the uh we now go
to questions
firstly from the public and then from
the media the first question
is a video tim from hoddleston
good afternoon i am one of the uk
residents that finds themselves trapped
abroad after being given little
to no notice to return home i now find
myself stuck in germany
until next year what is being done to
help uk residents
like myself thank you thank you tim
well i i can understand the frustration
that you feel and others who are
who are caught abroad by the
measures that have been brought in to
restrict travel
from the uk now obviously we as the uk
government
want to see you able to come home and
we're having discussions with other
governments
right around the world to ensure that
that travel can safely happen
so for instance you will have seen that
there was an agreement
reached with the french government and
also the
uh the european union said that the the
travel should continue but they want it
to continue
understandably in a safe way the problem
with this new variant
is that we are trying to restrict it
from moving outside the areas where it
is now la at large
which as you can see from the maps is
broadly
at the southeast and the east of england
including london so the short answer is
we're working with our international
colleagues uh to try to get you home
tim you and others who are
uh caught abroad by this uh it's it's
it's difficult um and we'll do
everything we can to get you back
the next question is from catherine from
southwest
london also by a video good afternoon
and happy christmas
given the new variation of covid19 will
you consider a move to online learning
for schools for a longer period than the
five days currently planned at the
beginning of january term
also will you consider rolling out the
vaccine
for vulnerable teachers who are putting
our lives on the line to keep schools
open during the pandemic
thank you thank you catherine and happy
christmas to you
um i um i i i as you know we've put in
place
a new plan for uh for the new year to
ensure that there's testing
in secondary schools to keep students
safe but also to keep
the teachers safe when it comes to the
vaccine
just before i hand over to jenny harry's
to
to comment what i'd say is that
we follow strict clinical
advice in terms of the order in which
people get vaccinated so if people
are clinically vulnerable and whether
they're teachers or not they will get
early access to the vaccine
and i think following that clinical
order of priority is very important
because that's the best way to protect
life it's also the best way for us all
to get through to the other side of this
because once those who are clinically
vulnerable
are better protected then it's it will
get easier for
all of us jenny thank you secretary of
state i'm sensing from the question that
kathryn you might be a teacher so it's a
good opportunity to say thank you to all
the teachers who i know
have been working really hard because
the public health implications of
children being out of school are not
just now but they are for their lives so
it's a really important
environment in terms of clinical
vulnerability
certainly the evidence that we have and
we're continuing to look at that sage
has been looking
uh just in the last week or so the data
doesn't suggest that
teachers themselves are at any greater
risk but clearly
teachers who are clinically vulnerable
will be anxious and as the secretary of
state has said
the different groups the clinically
extremely vulnerable have been
recognized and are already in the higher
risk group alongside those who are 70
and over
and those who are clinically vulnerable
i.e have more
general conditions but nevertheless uh
increasingly
uh vulnerable in in the face of a new
virus
are included in in group six so i hope
that gives
teachers assurance that those
vulnerabilities have been considered
and obviously jcvi has looked at that
independently
but we've been able to feed in much of
the information and scientific evidence
that we've had
around different risk ratios
thanks very much thank you uh catherine
um
next question is from layla and the two
at uh the bbc
leila secretary um you've just said when
it comes to coronavirus that it's better
to act
sooner but the prime minister said on
saturday that the new strain
was present across the country your
chief scientific advisor said on monday
that it wasn't possible
to stop it from spreading beyond the
south east and you're only announcing
today
the widening of tier 4 within the south
east and east of england and only from
boxing date haven't you wasted
valuable time in trying to get ahead of
the new
strain of the virus and if i may to dr
harry's
you've talked about yet another more
transmissible
strain being identified from south
africa how confident are you that the
new
four-tier system is strong enough to
tackle that
thanks very much well as you know when
we got the information on
uh friday afternoon about the impact of
the new variant
on uh transmission that it's that much
more
contagious we acted incredibly fast to
put the
to the fourth tier in place uh and then
today we've uh broadened that there are
parts of the country where
the case rates thankfully as you saw in
the charts have been coming down
and the whole basis of the tiered system
is to take a proportionate approach to
the areas where we need
very firm action and other areas where
we
clearly need restrictions
but they don't have to be as drastic now
added to that of course is everybody's
personal responsibility
and that is the critical thing this
christmas
and through to the new year
it is really important that people make
sure that they minimize the chances of
them passing on the disease because it's
actually by
all of our actions collectively
that we get this under control on the
new variant and the south african
variant i'm going to pass to
susan hopkins if i may who is the expert
on the genomics and then ask jenny to
comment on the epidemiology susan
great thank you so the the new variant
in the uk which we've identified is very
different to the variant in south africa
it's got different mutations
both of them look like they're more
transmissible we have more evidence on
the transmission
for the uk variant because we've been
studying that with great detail with
academic partners
we're still learning about the south
african variant and you've heard already
the measures that we're introducing to
ensure that we quarantine people
who are coming in from south africa and
therefore we are pretty confident
actually that that this the system we
have in place
will help control the spread clearly
this needs to be continually monitored
and we have a genomic system in place to
do that
and we are looking at to constantly
enhance the detection
of cases in travelers i'll hand over to
jenny thank you
susan so uh yes i think going back to
the tier system uh obviously
uh as you could see from the slides
against the old version of kovid our
original one we were dealing with
uh those tiering systems in tier three
has been very successful
the problem now is that we have very
high rising rates of the new
uh variant in the uk and and i think
just generally we
expect viruses to mutate so i think this
should not come
as a surprise what is obviously very
clear is that the uk has
a huge capacity to look at these
different variants
and advise at an early stage so that's
very positive in terms of the
tiering effectively what it's doing it's
encouraging and tightening our own
behaviors and helping us to keep those
behaviors
within the areas that we are living and
working and that actually is the most
important thing although the virus
in both these cases appears to be more
transmissible
at the moment on current evidence the
actual disease that one gets is no
different and so all of the basic
measures which we are continually trying
to do and which the tears help us to do
should actually prevent it so normal
things wearing face coverings if we're
with people
crowded places that we don't know
keeping our distance generally
keeping rooms ventilated not going out
when we don't need to keeping all of our
contacts down so
exactly the same interventions are the
right ones and they will work against
all of the variants what the tears are
doing are helping us with that behavior
and limiting us when perhaps we want to
stray off course a little bit and we
forget
thank you very much indeed the next
question is from dan hewitt at itv dan
uh thank you secretary of state and
given the direction of travel here
isn't it now inevitable that the vast
majority of the country if not
all of england will end up in tier 4 at
some point in the next few weeks
if so why wait for that time why not do
that more decisively now
on the new strain of the virus i know
it's early but is there any evidence at
this stage to suggest
that it wouldn't work so the new vaccine
wouldn't work against this new strain
and a very quick fact question can we
have the latest number please and the
number of people who've received their
first
dose of the fisa vaccination please uh
thanks very much so i'll answer the
first and third and then
pass over to uh dr hopkins for the
second
question the answer to the third is that
we will be publishing tomorrow
the full data on the vaccination program
so far
and we'll publish those as formal
government statistics
for the first time and then we'll expand
the statistics that are available
around this around this program on a
weekly basis as we as we're going to
publish
those data weekly from now on
on the first question absolutely we act
fast and you'll have seen from the
action that we took
and announced the prime minister
announced on saturday that we're
prepared to act incredibly fast
and take further action as we did this
morning
we also want that action to be
proportionate and in the parts of the
country where the number of the new
variant
is very low of course we want to keep it
that way
and the current tiers are are working
what we've all got to do as dr harris
has just set
out is we've all got to take
responsibility for our own actions as
well
and reduce the amount that we might be
that anybody might be spreading it
because of this critical fact
one in three people who have coronavirus
don't know they have it
but can still spread it and if we all
act like we might have it
then that is the best way to reduce the
transmission
thank you so i would just reiterate that
treat everyone like they have it and
we'll start to get to a better place
um from the point of view of the vaccine
so we have no evidence at the moment
that the vaccine will not work
so actually what that means in fact is
that there's strong evidence that it
will work
because the vaccine produces a strong
immune response and it's broad
and it acts against lots of variation in
the virus
what we are doing is laboratory studies
with people who have
had previous infection and you've had
vaccine
to look and see in the laboratory how
their blood kills the virus
those take a number of weeks as we grow
the virus and do those studies
as soon as they're available we will of
course release them we will also be
monitoring the people who've had the
vaccine very carefully as we would
anyway
in coming weeks to determine whether
they have a less risk of
infection both of clinical infection but
also of subclinical infection
particularly in healthcare workers who
are getting regular screening
so we will have both laboratory data and
then clinical data
in weeks ahead that will uh help us at
the moment though
we are we have all the faith in the
vaccines that we have
they produce a broad response and i
would recommend that everyone who is
offered one
takes a vaccine you're watching a bbc
news special on the latest coronavirus
briefing from downing street we're going
to be saying goodbye to viewers on bbc
one now but there's continuing coverage
of course on the bbc news channel
this is enough to bear down on this new
variant and if it's not
what other levers have you've got to
pull to try and bear down on the new
variant
and to dr harry's as well you've
outlined some pretty stark
increases in infections in recent days
and weeks do you expect those percentage
increases
in infections to be mirrored in
hospitalizations and ultimately deaths
as we go further down the line and if
you do what impact will that have on the
nhs
well robin answer to your first question
it took
us at some time to work out the
three-tiered system
which was calibrated to keep the old
variant the original variants
uh under under control and we got to a
point
that the tiered system the three-tiered
system
was effective against the old variants
in fact there's an interesting study
being published today in the lancet
that tests again the the old variant
against those three tiers
the critical question is tier four
working against
the uh the new variant just as
you asked in your question we we have
made sure that the tier four measures
do as much as is reasonably possible but
it
all depends on how people actually
behave
you know there is this is a partnership
there's so much that we can do in terms
of setting the rules and legislating
from government with all of the
consequences that those actions have
but there's something that every single
person can and should do
especially with the vaccine actually i
was about to say
on the horizon it's not on the horizon
it's here it's being
injected into people's arms right now
and
with just the time to get the vaccine
rolled out
left we should all be extremely careful
about the social interactions that we
have
because it is yes about the rules that
we set in government
but it's actually about how every single
person acts and the good thing is that
throughout this crisis
the vast majority of people have
acted in a really responsible way
they've done their bit and and of course
it's easy to see
you know pictures of people running for
trains and what have you but actually
that has been a
small minority so let's all
stick at it and
not give into temptation and that way
we'll be able to get through it and make
sure that tier 4 is indeed
effective against the new variant
there was a further question embedded
there was i think
about case case rate rises and how that
translates to the nhs
so obviously you can see from the slides
that that
sharp rise in cases is going to need
some stopping
and as secretary of state has said this
is not something that can be
orchestrated it is something which we
all have to do and however
sadder time of year it is for us to be
reminded that we need to behave that
way it is a very stark reminder that we
do need to
to manage our own behaviors keep our
distances
um i think as i said earlier there is no
reason at the moment to suggest that the
variant to the new variant will
if you like turn into more severe
disease
or more deaths but clearly if we have
more cases then we will see rising
numbers and those numbers are rising
quite quickly now
but it's not inevitable that they will
uh if we do all take those behaviors to
keep our distance over christmas
limit the number of people that we're
with those numbers are not inevitable
rises and and one area where i think
it's important to highlight
obviously uh care homes and the elderly
are areas where we have seen very
significant
uh rates sadly of deaths before uh
and serious cases there are significant
measures in place now and secretary of
state has
obviously highlighted this afternoon
that testing is going
in urgently in response to these rising
case rates so i think with all the hard
work which
the care home staff have been putting in
and the residents themselves of course
in quite difficult circumstances
there are opportunities for us to ensure
that these cases do not just
automatically translate through into
hospital cases
thanks rob it's on us all um jane
merrick at the eye
hi jane hi there thank you and to the
health secretary first of all he said
that tier three is not enough
to contain the new variant and that is
spreading at a dangerous rate
and across the country hospital patients
is at the peak
in spring nerve tax this morning that
the the
new variant has seeded across the
country we're now hearing of a second
new variant from south africa so why
aren't we going into a full lockdown
across the whole country and if i could
ask the medics
and neil ferguson of neil nerve tag said
this morning
that there is a statistical
statistically significant
albeit small evidence of an increased
proportion of infections among
the under 15s is there a case for mass
testing in primaries
and perhaps a staggered return for
primaries as well as secondaries
thanks very much jane so the answer to
the first question
is that the new variant is highly
concentrated
and the stay-at-home rule in the east
the southeast and london
is aimed at keeping this new variant
from
spreading across the country and that's
why we've taken the approach
that we have in terms of the tiering and
expanding the number of areas that are
in
tier four on the education question i'm
going to ask
susan to answer on the virology and then
uh jenny to answer on the uh
on the question of the s the
consequences uh especially for
uh for schools so so firstly we have no
evidence that this virus is more
transmissible in
children yet but what we do know is that
when this virus took off
the children were one of the few things
that were happening at the end of
the last national restrictions that was
still happening and mixing so it was
more likely that the transmission could
start in that place
and i think we have seen that especially
younger age teenagers
have seen a higher number of infections
there's much less infection in primary
school children
and we've seen that throughout the the
pandemic to date
and we will constantly take decisions
with the
experts in education over what is best
for the children
along with controlling the virus and
i'll hand over to jenny to add some more
just to add to that i think as susan has
said
um if we look at historically if we're
going back a few months now
what happened when we had very
significant rates of the uh
original variant covid virus in in the
north
we did see rises in cases in children
there but they were
very much lower than they were in the
adult population
they did rise quite steeply in teenagers
and i think we do know that there is
transmission but as susan has said
it is very it is generally lower as you
go down the age groups and it is
extremely difficult to untangle
uh what the children are doing so
there is perhaps an assumption that if
children are at home they won't transmit
disease but we have to be really clear
that that
is the case we schools are very
controlled environments in many in many
cases
um and so we know what children are
doing there
and it's very difficult to disentangle
for example what a child is doing in
school
what a child is doing at school gates or
on the way to school
or in their community so i think
education is really important for
children
and we shouldn't jump to the conclusion
that
just because every child is in school
that that is
a significant place for transmission and
the citizens said there is a lot of
work ongoing and continuous studies to
try and understand this in a little bit
more detail
thank you jane merry christmas next
question is
from sam lister at the express
thank you secretary of state with the
oxford vaccine on the brink of being
approved and 100 million doses on order
how soon do you think you'll be able to
stand before us and say that the vast
majority of the british public have been
vaccinated and this virus
is beaten and how many people do you
expect to be vaccinated before easter
oh sam um you're so tempting um
the um i i really want to uh have a stab
at the answer but
the truth is we just don't know uh it
depends on the speed of manufacture
uh we are we are we are um i'm really
thrilled that the
the full data has been passed to the
regulator
and i have every confidence that the
regulator will look at it with
great capability i want to put no
pressure on them
in terms of the decision or the timing
of the decision it is absolutely a
matter
for them but then we've always said that
the
vast majority of the vaccinations will
be in the new year
and i think that you know our facts
nation program started before most
people
expected it to we've made really good
strides
over the month of december so far
and we will go as fast as we possibly
can
this will be a big task for the nhs what
i would say in terms of the number of
people vaccinated
is that we will we will i think we will
get there by the spring
and um you know that people should
therefore just
hold on and really try to
resist temptation to do things that they
shouldn't and to see people that they
don't need to
and i know that that is tough and it's
going to be a tough winter
but the more people do that the more
quickly we're going to get through this
together uh i i i
i wish i could give you a uh a more uh a
more
uh direct answer than that uh but we
just
aren't there yet the true answer will be
as fast as
we possibly can the
final question from argenting at the
huff post
hello people are pinning their hopes on
the vaccine allowing
a return to normality in a few months
but
professor stephen evans of the london
school of hygiene and tropical medicine
suggested this week that the uk wouldn't
be able to get back to normal
until half the population had been
vaccinated and there are some
suggestions that might not happen until
unless rates of the virus are very low
given the emergence of a highly
transmissible new variant
has the government over-promised yet
again in suggesting that easter could
mark a return to normality
no i'm highly confident that we'll get
things back to normal before
2022 based on the speed at which we can
roll out the vaccine
not least because it's really important
that
the speed of rollout of the vaccine is
accelerating
all the time we're adding more places to
where the vaccine's being deployed from
and so we're accelerating the pace of
the rollout if you take the current
pace and take that as a given then
without an acceleration you would get to
the
the wrong calculation for the speed at
which this
vaccine is going to be rolled out but
each venue
that we open for vaccinations has to be
approved
has to be got right it's very very
important because you've got to make
sure that the vaccine gets
into people's arms in a safe way
so that we know that they're safe but
also that the vaccine
works that's why we're not putting
projections on these figures
and precisely as you as you say to make
sure
uh that we only uh we only commit to
that which we know we can
that we know we can deliver i don't know
if uh anything to add
susan no i agree the sooner we vaccinate
people the better but we'll it will take
some time
that's right uh thank you very much
indeed thanks everyone
that ends this uh coronavirus
briefing and the final thing to say is i
wish you all a
happy christmas
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news